# Sparkify Project: Data Modeling with Postgres

## Brief:

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. The goal of the project is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.



## Description of Source Datasets:

1) Song DataSet

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. You will find the datasets in data/song_data

2) Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations. The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. You will find the datasets in data/log_data

## Scripts

- create_tables.py: 
creates Postgres database, tables, and drops tables. Uses sql queries from sql_queries.py

- sql_queries.py:
contains all sql queries used in the other py files. It includes create table statements, insert statements and select statements which are called by the other scripts.

- etl.py:
runs etl pipeline to process both datasets into the Postgres database structure. Loads the data into dataframe before calling sql queries to insert into the tables.

- test.ipynb:
Not called in the ETL pipeline. This can be used to query the Postgres tables to verify the data has been correctly inserted or apply more queries for analytical use.




## Database Star Schema


One Fact Table

1) songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
columns: songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

Four Dimension Tables

1) users - users in the app
columns: user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

2) songs - songs in music database
columns: song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

3) artists - artists in music database
columns: artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude

4) time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
columns: start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday



## Schema Justification

The star schema structure allows a logical arrangement of tables centralised by the single songplays fact table. It allows for simplified queries that the Sparkify team can execute optimally.



## How to run ETL pipeline

in the terminal, execute the following:

1) python create_tables.py - this executes the create_tables script to create the database and set up the table structure. 

2) python etl.py - this executes the etl script to process the source data into the database schema created in (1). The json files are read and inserted into the fact and dimension tables.

3) Once the following two steps have been completed, a user can read the database and apply analytical queries. A user can use test.ipynb to query the fact and dimension tables directly.
